---
layout: post
title: "Week 1: Course Introduction and Racket"
due: 2022-09-28
duedate: 2022-09-28
permalink: /notes/week/1
categories: notes
---

# Week 1 Lecture Notes

- Class this week will be led by Neda, I (Kris) am away for previously-scheduled university business. We may have a short Zoom session on Monday if people would like to join, I will try to post a link to Blackboard.

- Neda's goal is to get you used to the basic workflow of booting up Dr. Racket, writing a tiny Racket program, and then being able to run that 
program on the command line. She will also demonstrate how this works on an Autograder project.

- Even though I will not be at class, I still ask that you watch the course videos--it is not much, and they are designed to be helpful. Generally I will lead class in-person, I understand that students will treat the videos as a reference. But at least when you're starting, I really encourage you to do it at least for this week, especially as I will be gone.

- I will not have office hours this week, please email me if you would like to meet--office hours will begin next Tuesday.

- For the first week of the course, you should:

  - If you haven't used a command-line interface on your machine, you need to get comfortable using one. I recommend PowerShell on Windows (please read a quick tutorial to avoid wasting a lot of time) or iTerm2 (Mac OS). If you use Linux, you should use whatever terminal emulator you are most familiar with.

  - Make sure you have some version of Python 3 installed (type `python3` or `python` and see if anything happens).

  - Make sure you add the `racket` executable to your path by booting up Dr. Racket and doing Help->Configure Racket for Command line...

  - Next, you should make sure that `racket` is present in your path by typing `racket` and making sure you get a shell.

- You should try practicing this workflow, writing a tiny Racket file like

```hello.rkt
(displayln "Hello, World!")
```

and then being able to do 

```
> racket hello.rkt
```

and see it print the corresponding string.

- Neda will cover this workflow on Tuesday.
